
APPLICATION PROGRAM INTERFACE (API)

These are structures used for data exchange between programs with different or similar architectures. Kind of Brigde
One of the best things about it is that we don’t need to worry about the architecture or database structure of the applications we’re working with.
We just need to know how to send a request and what the response will be.

IOT architectures also can use API structures.




API TYPES
1. API TYPES ACCORDING TO SCTRUCTURE
2. API TYPES ACCORDING TO USAGE PURPOSE





API TYPES ACCORDING TO SCTRUCTURE

1. GraphQL (QUERYING LANGUAGE) --> It is an open-source data querying and processing language developed for APIs 
               It allows clients to request only the data they need—and nothing more—from the server.
               client receives only the data it needs.
               Scenario: Requesting only a user's name and email address

2. SOAP (PROTOCOL) --> (Simple Object Access Protocol) is an XML-based communication protocol that enables applications 
             written in different platforms and languages to securely exchange data over a network.
             In corporate systems that require strict rules and high security.
             Scenario: A bank sends a request to transfer funds to another bank in XML format.

3. REST API (ARCHITECTURE / USING HTTP PROTOCOL) --> It is an architecture that enables different software systems to communicate with each other 
                               securely over the Internet according to standard rules. It allows data (typically in JSON format) 
                               to be sent and received using the HTTP PROTOCOL. 
                               Common in simple web and mobile apps.
                               Scenario: Retrieve user number 5 as JSON using the GET /users/5 request.

4. gRPC (RPC FRAMEWORK) --> It is an open-source Remote Procedure Call (RPC) framework developed by Google that enables 
            high-performance, low-latency communication between different programming languages.
            For fast communication between microservices.
            Scenario: Microservices quickly querying inventory information.






API TYPES ACCORDING TO USAGE PURPOSE

1. Public/Open API --> These are APIs that are available to everyone (including external developers) 
                        over the Internet and are typically accessible via authentication
                        Example: A weather application retrieves Istanbul’s current temperature from a weather API

2. Private/Internal API --> These are APIs that are used solely for data sharing within a company’s or organization’s 
                            internal departments and systems and are not accessible externally
                            Example: A company’s internal application retrieves employee leave information from its database


3. Partner API --> This is a type of API provided to authorized individuals for the purpose of securely 
                    exchanging data between the systems of companies that have specific business partners
                    An e-commerce platform checks delivery information through its shipping partner’s API

4. Composite API --> These are APIs that combine multiple APIs or data sources into a single call to meet 
                    complex system requirements
                    Example: A single API request checks inventory, processes the payment, and creates a shipment.







** The main advantage of POSTMAN, for the API client / HTTP request can be simulated without having any web based structure
such front end design or express based backend



RATE LIMITING

a technique used to control the number of requests a client can make to a server within a set time period.
Usually remaining rate limit can be seen inside the response's header.

Request tracking: The server identifies clients using an IP address, user ID, or API key.
Threshold comparison: It checks recent usage against the allowed maximum.
Rejection: If a client goes over the limit, the server blocks extra requests and sends back a "429 Too Many Requests" status code




ENDPOINT, PATH PARAMETERS, QUERY PARAMETERS

For Example --> https://bored-api.appbrewery.com/


ENDPOINT

baseURL / Endpoint for example 

https://api.example.com/users --> https://api.example.com (baseURL), /users (endpoint)



QUERY PARAMETERS

** Critical point : Do Not Forget "?" before query parameter(s)

Using to filtering, sorting, searching or paginationing

baseURL / Endpoint ? query = value (single) or baseURL / Endpoint ? query1 = value & query2 = value & query3 = value (multiple)

https://api.example.com/products?category=electronics&limit=10

https://api.example.com/users?country=Turkey&sort=name&page=2



PATH PARAMETERS

defines a specific resources

baseURL / Endpoint / path parameter

https://api.example.com/users/42 --> response will be user with id 42, warning message (usually 404 not found) or empty user info

404 not found --> user does not existing
400 bad request --> path type should be integer instead of string 






JSON (JS Object Notation)

To format the data sent over internet for more readbility, serialized (smaller size) and easier way. Structured by key-value pairs

** It seems as object. However, it should be considered a kind of string.

JS Object Example --> definetion needed

const jsObject = {
    'k1' : value,
    'k2' : value
}

JSON Example

{
    'k1' : value,
    'k2' : value
}

JSON - JS OBJECT CONVERSION

JS to JSON --> const JsonData = JSON.stringify(JSdata) --> the result will be act like string.

JSON to JS --> const jsObject = JSON.parse(JSONdata) --> Since incoming JSON acts like string, without convert it to JS 'object'
                                                         we cannot use object built in functions

** Without comversion, json data cannot be managed inside the JS code 





AUTHENTICATION vs. AUTHORIZATION

For Course: https://www.udemy.com/course/the-complete-web-development-bootcamp/learn/lecture/38912024?start=0#overview

Authentication: Answers the question “Who are you?” It verifies the user’s identity.
Example: Logging in with a username and password.

Authorization: Answers the question “What are you allowed to do?” It checks the authenticated user’s permissions.
Example: Only an admin can delete another user’s account.

Authentication verifies identity; authorization verifies permissions.

Login → Authentication → Authorization → Resource

Real-life example: Using an ID card to enter a company building is authentication. 
Being allowed to enter only specific rooms is authorization.


Does the request contain a valid token? → Authentication
Does the user have the admin role?      → Authorization
Can the user modify this specific item? → Authorization

If authentication credentials are missing or invalid, the server generally returns:
401 Unauthorized
Despite its name, 401 Unauthorized normally represents an authentication problem.
If the user is authenticated but does not have permission to perform the operation, the server generally returns:
403 Forbidden




0 Authentication --> for temporarly security corcerns, rate limitation can be adjusted.

1 Basic Authentication --> username and password, usually use base64 encoding. For instance, one the username and password
added via postman, encoded key can be found on the request header as base64 encoded "username:password" format.


2 API-KEY Authorization --> can be added request header or query parameter as endpoint

API keys are generally used to:
Identify an application or project
Authenticate server-to-server communication
Track API usage
Apply rate limits and quotas
Restrict access to specific APIs
API keys are often long-lived. If an API key is stolen, an attacker may continue using it until it is revoked or replaced.
API keys should not be:
Hard-coded in frontend JavaScript
Embedded in publicly distributed applications
Committed to Git repositories
Included directly in URLs
Written to application logs
Environment variables or secret-management systems should be used to store them.


3 TOKEN based Authorization --> A token is usually generated after a user or application successfully authenticates.
                                Once user authenticated successfully, we do not need to use username or password anymore.
                                just generated token.
                                EXAMPLE : oauth or oauth2 based authentication

                                username,password --> Token <--> API


REAL LIFE EXAMPLE : Assume a 3th party app using google calender info so while accessing to 3th party app, we are using
                    "sign in with GOOGLE" option so user can use Google authentication token within app. by that,
                    User does not need to use personal info with 3th party app, instead, google just provide the only necessary
                    user info with 3th party app. 
                    PROXY : A proxy is an intermediary server positioned between a client and a destination server.
                    Client → Proxy → Target Server
                    Browser → Proxy Server → example.com


The user logs in
        ↓
The server verifies the credentials
        ↓
The server generates an access token
        ↓
The client sends the token with later requests

Tokens are commonly sent using the Authorization header:
GET /api/profile HTTP/1.1
Host: api.example.com
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs...

Bearer means that whoever possesses the token may be able to use it. Therefore, bearer tokens must be protected carefully.

Token-based systems commonly use:
A short-lived access token
A longer-lived refresh token
Roles and permission scopes
Token expiration
Token rotation and revocation mechanisms


** For basic authentication methods, to increase the security level, the other option is using
    HTTPS instead of HTTP

HTTP + TLS = HTTPS
When an API key or token is sent over HTTPS, TLS provides three important protections:
Confidentiality: Third parties on the network cannot easily read the request or its credentials.
Integrity: Attackers cannot easily modify requests or responses during transmission.
Server authentication: The TLS certificate helps the client verify that it is communicating with the correct server.

HTTPS
└── Protects the communication channel
    └── HTTP request
        ├── API key or token → Helps identify the requester
        └── Roles or scopes  → Determine allowed operations

API key or token: Who is making the request?
Authorization rules: What is the requester allowed to do?
HTTPS: How are the credentials and data transported securely?


In a production environment, an API that uses API keys or tokens should always use HTTPS. 
Credentials should be sent through headers, kept out of URLs and logs, 
rotated when appropriate, and limited to the minimum permissions required.